Friends of my Ruslan and Lyudmila,
in Adam Smith was his diploma;
Diana's breast, the cheeks of Flora,
and telling trochee from iambic
He was without that dithyrambic
that world where every man's a critic
boo Phaedra out as paralytic,
to life grew colder than the dead.
of entertaining the half-dead:
The happiness of youth is dead,
the ballroom drove me off my head:
just like, on turf, your fleeting tread.
to blow his brains out, but in stead
to drive the swooning senses mad;
with amber pipes from Tsaregrad;12
one smoothes the pillows down in bed,
At first Onegin's tongue produced
Oh, when, and to what desert banished,
My goddesses! Where are you banished?
have other maidens, since you vanished,
my little feet, where have you vanished,
he's dreadfully dissatisfied;
you left no steps that could be tracked:
His hair was fashionably curled,
and where most surely notes are sped.
reader, or where you've shone and glittered!
Onegin, my good friend, was littered
our lives were flat, and what had fired
both hearts to blaze had now expired;
far, far from taly, his adored.
deep in Moldavia the abhorred,
Unforced, as conversation passed,
a haze in me, but  grew used
his bow was wholly unaffected.
his strangeness, wholly unaffected,
n French Onegin had perfected
which held him silently subjected,
a masculine disguise to aid
stumblingly call to mind he did
two verses of the Aeneid.
Still tumbling, devil, snake and Cupid
Still in the porch, exhausted-stupid,
on springtime grasses of the field,
under the table's linen shield,
from her Monsieur took on the child.
He was sweet-natured, and yet wild.
the ancients have gone stiff and cold,
the moderns rage against the old.
and now at last he saw the World.
 feel a small foot in my hand;
sometimes, in reverie's sacred land,
and took a mortgage on his land.
His father failed to understand
But you, blest husbands, to the end
you kept your friendship with our friend:
custom is despot of mankind.
can yet keep nail-care much in mind:
pursue his love -- and at one bound
was quite beyond his wit, we found.
stómina,11 thronged all around
by Naiads, one foot on the ground,
frenzy which wrecks our lives for sound,
and listen for the heart's first sound,
which Ovid sang, for which the bard,
condemned to a lifetime of hard,
Eugene attends the boulevard,
and everything is cramped and loud;
while a mazurka holds the crowd;
The bitterness was mine -- the ice
he'd pop the poison in his chalice!
was his; we'd both drunk passion's chalice:
there waited for us both the malice
what traps he'd set him, with what malice
encore Moëna,7 -- and rejoice
to know the audience hears his voice.
of recompense beyond endurance,
t fascinates by its assurance
here's boredom, madness or pretence,
her progress at the masquerade.
to gentlemen on every side
at feasts, was strong and fancy-free?
always contented with his life,
and with his dinner, and his wife.
as  recall a bygone age?
all this, at eighteen years of age,
Faublas'3 disciple for an age --
adorned the sanctum of our sage.
as was the old suspicious sage,
and yawn in silence at the stage
Evgeny's total store of knowledge
Shall  depict with expert knowledge
where he was master of his college,
where the prize-boy of fashion's college
across the Baltic in exchange
for wood and tallow; all the range
Was it to no effect that he,
with this the hero of my tale:
such crystalled scents as best are able
Porcelain and bronzes on the table,
When out to burst a rival's bubble,
of jealousy, to seem to tremble
How early he'd learnt to dissemble,
How early on he learnt to trouble
his epigrams topped up with bile.
already tends too much to smile
his virulence that made you smile,
But God, how deadly dull to sample
Let others learn from his example!
and glumly serves the medicine bottle,
And the sly baseness, fit to throttle,
that even so my wretched style
Was it for you that  became
long since unstirred by praise and fame
to do them all is easy game.
which  myself won't praise or blame
n languid silence, or the flame
since 'm a member of the same.
of eloquence, and just the same
Which one comes first? t's just the same
felicitously every theme,
of listening like a judge-supreme
until Bréguet's unsleeping chime
that stretched from Romulus in his prime
across the years to our own time.
advises him of dinner-time.
from ball to bed behold him come;
that king of the satiric scene,
youth's choice, the flower of French cuisine:
for unmeant kindness -- how he shone!
taken your place, though not your throne?
Parisian taste invents for one --
lend ears to my lugubrious tone:
Monsieur l'Abbé, the mediocre,
how bold or bashful there, and here
with young Semyónova,9 and there
then suddenly she's off, and there
three pairs of handsome ones -- yet there
No, never in the hottest fire
they don't deserve what they inspire
of boiling youth did  desire
 could describe here his attire;
to hear what latest modes require,
the highest circles are a bore.
is dressed, undressed, and dressed once more?
you were the first ones he forswore;
enough of my loquacious lyre:
on stage are thumping without cease;
impart such lessons as you please!
then afterwards, alone, at ease,
sits with Limburg's vivacious cheese
his mind, so cold and so precise.
and he was bored with social noise;
or, with an epigram-surprise,
here there's no conscience, here no sense;
the horses fidget worse and worse;
the coachmen ring the fire, and curse
proficiency to speak and write,
with any torture so exquisite
he stalked the drawing-rooms, remote
from Boston's cloth or gossip's quote;
yes, focus on them your lorgnette,
that all of Russia can't contribute
one pair!  pay them memory's tribute
promptly had nothing left to give.
had only debts on which to live.
why fight what's known to be decisive?
A man who's active and incisive
have each asked him to a soirée:
yet, truthfully and not in chaff,
who'll clap an entrechat, or scoff
at Cleopatra, hiss her off,
now even Didelot's tedious stuff.''
Dressed like -- --,14 duly dreading
the barbs that envy's always spreading,
He mounts the sledge, with daylight fading:
his collar in its beaver braiding
each in tumultuous turn descending
On the seashore, with storm impending,
Whatever for caprice of spending
ingenious London has been sending
his life till dawn's already making,
Then, after midday he'll be waking;
the merchant's up, the cabman's walking
spurs of Chevalier Gardes are clinking,
incendiary looks are slinking,
towards his stall, the pedlar's hawking;
fancies once more are hotly bubbling,
once more that touch is fiercely troubling
tribute of tears, applause's shrilling,
there сzerov8 shared the unwilling
and there at large he goes patrolling
Meanwhile, attired for morning strolling
No, early on his heart was cooling
it's easy, without too much fooling,
We all meandered through our schooling
no, not for long were belles the ruling
More wine, he calls, to drench the flaming
when Bréguet's chime is heard proclaiming
and so, before the world of learning,
Your curiosity is burning
still coughing, hissing, clapping, champing;
the audience still is busy stamping,
and though to do so would be daring,
it's my profession; he was wearing --
So, like Childe Harold, glum, unpleasing,
no glance so sweet, no sigh so teasing,
a great attraction to conversing.
to his disputing and his cursing;
 longed, like every breaker hissing,
to smother her dear feet with kissing.
while Petersburg's already rousing,
And Eugene? half-awake, half-drowsing,
The house is packed out; scintillating,
He's flown to Talon's,4 calculating
the gallery claps -- it's bored with waiting --
that there his friend Kavérin's5 waiting;
Three whole hours, at the least accounting,
giddy as Venus when she's mounting
he had the talent of saluting
while serious topics were disputing,
with combs, and steel utensils serving
as files, and scissors straight and curving,
and band already tired of blowing,
and entered. Ballroom overflowing...
soon, infidelity proved cloying,
and friends and friendship, soul-destroying;
and radiate a rainbow: blazing
shadows that flit behind the glazing
shows freedom's advocate, that strong
champion of rights, as in the wrong.
and take due warning from my speech.
now pay attention,  beseech,
he turns away: ``'ve had enough --
so pure, so spotless through and through,
and sighs, and asks oneself all through:
the meaning of an epigraph,
but by and large their talk's a hash
of the most harmless, hopeless trash.
There once  too strolled back and forth:
but 'm allergic to the North...1
in taffeta of mourning black.
and hid the bookshelf's dusty stack
and never played a shrewder trick.
but when past joking he fell sick,
but pantaloons, waistcoat, and frock,
these words are not of Russian stock:
the flaming roses of a cheek,
to kiss Armida's lips, or seek
where you were born as well,  think,
and bred upon the Neva's brink,
at the Academic Diction-book.
though years ago  used to look
a mild rebuke was his worst mark,
and then a stroll in Letny Park.
of other's thought -- a splendid goal;
his Strasbourg pie, or point a moral,
the subtle spouse was just as loyal --
and the majestic, antlered royal,
and though he liked a fiery quarrel --
dear ladies' feet fly past like hail,
let me acquaint you on the nail
and on their captivating trail
we'd better hasten to the ball,
 have no leisure to recall;
the art he'd studied best of all,
Onegin has outrun us all.
of work made him feel sick, and still
no word came flowing from his quill;
of raging passion's surge and roll
oppressed by emptiness of soul,
ever so roughly rocked my soul!
 liked his quality, the dream
retired, as he, from fashion's stream,
some ladies preach from Say and Bentham,
t's true, 'll not misrepresent them,
he really forced one to admire him --
``My uncle -- high ideals inspire him;
dared clean his nails in front of him,
could not conceive how solemn Grimm13
untirable, at sound of drum:
locked himself up inside his den
and truffles, which have ever been
at once they give a man the spleen.
so virtuous that, no sooner seen,
in lives that were just dawning then.
of blind Fortuna and of men
and with a yawn took up his pen,
The illness with which he'd been smitten
flown like an arrow, then he's given
Up to the porch our hero's driven:
something like spleen, that scourge of Britain,
He who has lived and thought is certain
days that are lost behind the curtain,
with comedies of swarm and din;
there caustic Shakhovskóy8 came in
swaying the artless, waiting on
of hope and gloom, romantic-fashion,
he's seen it all; with looks and fashion
ended his wild career of fashion
But, now 've praised the queens of fashion,
Fonvizin8 sparkled, freedom's champion,
Enchanted land! There like a lampion
they all have richly earned a pension;''
But when the hour of youthful passion
in terms of poetry or passion --
this was the science of that passion
he's viewed the boxes without passion,
in casual letters of confession --
he failed to join that sharp profession
and tried to write, but a hard session
dle again by dedication,
it mastered him in slow gradation;
he strove to achieve the appropriation
secure a secret assignation,
thank God, he had no inclination
 know (and seek your exculpation)
then he'd implore a declaration,
on words of foreign derivation,
the brilliant crackpot: this reaction
he read, and read -- no satisfaction:
with shelves of books deployed for action,
Rousseau (forgive a short distraction)
 grasp a stirrup with affection,
for him all sham has found rejection,
He lacked the slightest predilection
Another page of recollection:
he's gnawed by serpent Recollection,
but groomed an anecdote-collection
How soft his glance, or at discretion
Fate saved Evgeny from perdition:
at first Madame gave him tuition,
he's bowed politely; his attention
Escaped from social rhyme and reason,
 was Onegin's friend that season.
my disillusioned glass, and yearn,
that alien scene must  now turn
for friends of languor, or of fun,
not every day could he wash down
his beefsteak with champagne, or drown
and the derivative Knyazhnín:8
since  stopped sinning years ago.
see with their jugs the milk-girls go
or pine, persuade of yes or no,
so pious, and so clever too,
punctilious in his cotton cap,
has opened up his serving-trap.
the heartache that they bring lies deep.
though cold  am and sad; in sleep
wine of the Comet6 fills the cup;
he arrives -- the cork goes flying up,
our friend Katénin8 brought to bear
how brilliant with its instant tear!
complete with broad-brimmed bolivar,
in winter, on the cast-iron fender,
My love for it is just as tender,
bound where the magic bow will send her,
The city's early sounds awake her;
still shivering in the bitter weather
After a fine career, his father
He gave three balls a year, and rather
their lords, and thwack their palms together;
and more than once the German baker,
No moralizing from this joker;
without preliminary feeler
He cursed Theocritus and Homer,
it frankly, 'm a firm adorer
Eugene was free, and as a dresser
make Juvenal his text, or better
add vale when he signed a letter;
Russia's Terpsichore, shall never
your chorus, is it dead for ever?
with brilliant conquests by the shower,
You too, prime beauties in your flower
his freedom, in his youth's first flower,
by drozhkies jaunting at full power
she's up and flying through the air
a deft arrangement to his hair,
exists for me one special pair!
in, past concierge, up marble stair
no, nothing caused his heart to stir,
the cabinet behind the door
made London's dandy his professor.
He's off -- this ruthless legislator
for the footlights, this fickle traitor
and nothing pierced his senses' blur.
Then with a half-ethereal splendour,
Exhausted by the ballroom's clamour,
he sleeps, away from glare and glamour,
Now Latin's gone quite out of favour;
Onegin knew enough to savour
on most occasions between friends,
and by Repentance. All this lends,
to all the most adored actrices,
and ananas, the gold of trees.
brushes on thirty different scales;
twirls the other slowly as she pleases,
frightening with all despair's disguises,
straight to his stall, then turns his glasses
Applause. Onegin enters -- passes
the footmen sleep on the pelisses;
this denizen of the coulisses
Along the fronts of darkened houses,
What? nvitations? Yes, three houses
Some days he's still in bed, and drowses,
along the street where slumber drowses,
To live, it hurries, and to feel it hastes.
to lie down at her feet like slaves!
how envious was  of the waves
while roar of violins contrives
to drown the hiss of modish wives.
of kindling smiles in ladies' eyes.
like fluff before Aeolian breezes;
How well he donned new shapes and sizes --
haphazard; so, to God be thanks,
to pass for cultured in our ranks.
to scorn the men with whom he deals;
ghostlike, must trouble him who feels --
brushes for teeth, brushes for nails.
the boxes; boiling, pit and stalls;
and up the rustling curtain crawls.
the legatee of his relations --
the safest place for declarations,
n days of carefree aspirations,
Such were a young rake's meditations --
of ladies and of freakish fops.
project in silhouette the tops
across the public's toes; he steers
on unknown ladies in the tiers;
they're all chained up in different fetters,
He'd given up girls -- now gave up letters,
what occupied his chafing powers
throughout the boredom of the hours --
he'll spend before the looking-glass,
then from his cabinet he'll pass
 love their feet -- though  confess
in fact a thorough fop, no less.
the crush, the glitter and the gladness,
the atmosphere of youth and madness,
with passion and with shrewd obliqueness
across our snows of northern bleakness
Nursed in the orient's languid weakness,
stalking the momentary weakness,
the ladies' calculated dress;
by now he's driving home to dress.
Eugene's a pedant in his dress,
but Eugene's out from din and press:
And what's more, they're so supercilious,
so circumspect, and so punctilious,
and act the humble or imperious,
the indifferent, or the deadly serious!
of useful objects that the curious
or for the modishly luxurious --
objective of his thoughts and joys:
the new ballet he should be at.
she'll spin this way and that, and beat
The World found this enough to treat
fire of the cutlets' scalding fat,
the gift of recognizing what
you loved the opulent contact
against each other swift, small feet.
are just as nimble as their feet.
Eugene as clever, and quite sweet.
across the stage; he yawns: ``Ballet --
on ballroom's looking-glass parquet
and watch your daughters closer yet,
blue smoke of chimneys goes aloft,
shutters are opened and the soft
shall my sad gaze no more alight
this child of luxury and delight.
again  see your soulful flight?
in the mazurka he was light,
converting morning to midnight,
outside and in they star the night;
still everywhere the lamps are bright;
should have been analysed when caught,
or else... or else, may God forfend it!
You too, mamas,  pray attend it,
their looks and language in deceit
with cranium aching fit to split;
or languid bosoms; and no visit
of simple product supplements it.
a nation's wealth is, what augments it,
full of his usual pith and wit,
of rugs, and carpets' rich refinement.
and fatherland and grim confinement?
and in retreat from all enjoyment
and every day its own enjoyment?
its work, its torture, its enjoyment,
his young heyday's supreme employment,
he ended even your employment;
But was it happy, his employment,
that's where my years of youth were spent.
there, where the coulisse entrance went,
what flowers of spring display your dint?
madman, can you forget their print?
our deep economist had got
of the Terpsichorean foot.
the blood within my withered heart,
the wilful fancies of the heart.
one thing inspired his breath, his heart,
and fastens, like a term of art,
once more the love, once more the smart...
and self-oblivion was his art!
the heart of the professional flirt!
or Russia's chondria, for short;
how well he knew the way to hurt --
as well-read, though of pedant cast.
with sabre's slash, and bullet's blast.
yet he fell out of love at last
amusing, flattering with the best,
startling the ingenuous with a jest,
for raking up historic dust
as horses whirled him through the dust.
by will of Zeus, the high and just,
or stirring annalistic must;
with lampions studded all about
glitters with hoar-frost all about.
``Make way, make way,'' goes up the shout;
the sumptuous palais shines out;
all these are charming! but to put
"When will the devil come for you?"''
You husbands, deeply  respect you!
'm at your service to protect you;
to hide a hope, to make a show
 only write like this, you know,
a cheerful glimmer on the snow
and crisply crunch the morning snow.
twin lamps of serried coupés throw
or on the granite of the bay.
sickroom attendance night and day
tomorrow just like yesterday.
'd still like dances to this day:
always monotonously gay,
struck for Evgeny, with its play
when little notes come on a tray.
who late at night are whirled away
've wasted too much life away!
and never stir a foot away!
wanders in a distracted way
and how a country lives, and why
Prince Vyazemsky
it needs no gold if a supply
Onegin was assessed by many
(critical judges, strict as any)
reluctant to exhaust the boy,
treated his lessons as a ploy.
on features known, but to that dreary,
bored with hilarity, and weary,
before him roast beef, red and gory,
there Didelot10 crowned himself with glory:
and pâté, Strasbourg's deathless glory,
once more Corneille's majestic story;
That isn't our immediate worry:
where, in a cab, and furious hurry,
for in our time, beyond dubiety,
Capricious belles of grand Society!
But, did they not corrupt society,
Alas, on pleasure's wild variety
where shall he go, my rogue, my hearty?
a ball here, there a children's party;
it was goodbye, Monsieur l'Abbé.
over the Petersburg pavé --
